SCRIPT - REWORD THE SCRIPT 
POWER BI MODELLING

INTRODUCTORY 
Hello Welcome to Mensalytics
This introductory video is a part one of two part series of data modelling in POWER BI.

IN THIS VIDEO WE WILL BE DISCUSSING 
1. WHAT MODELLING IS IN POWER BI 
2. RDBMS VS POWER BI 
3. CONCEPTS OF DATA MODELLING 
4. RELATIONSHIPS 
5. PERFORMANCE & CONSIDERATIONS WHEN MODELLING DATA IN POWER BI  


STOP 

Now lets get into it

PART 1 
WHAT IS DATA MODELLING IN POWER BI ??
Data Modelling is the process of organising data from different sources in POWER BI.
This serves as the bone for interactive dashboards and reports for stakeholders.
It involves defining and creating relationships between tables using models like starschema, snowflake etc.
Star Schema is a popular option in industry and recommended by Microsoft. 
When modelling data in POWER BI, You must build a data model that can address all business related queries.
This task can be complex when dealing with data from diverse sources with vary levels of granularity.

PART 2 
BEFORE WE MOVE ON

I WANT US TO LOOK AT HOW POWER BI IS DIFFERENT FROM CONVENTIONAL DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
DATA MODELLING IN POWER BI DIFFERS FROM traditional database management system

Lets take 
Relational Database Management System
In RDBMS, data tables are defined with fixed number of columns
each assigned a data type ie Integer, text etc
This allows RDBMS to calculate storage requirements per row and number of rows per data file
this makes it well suited for transactional apps like Web shop sales.
Indexing in RDBMS enables quick record retrieval making transaction processing efficient.
Tables can be linked through relationships.
Retrieving data usually involves reading entire rows.
Furthermore aggregating data from multiple rows can be really slow.

PART 3 
POWER BI (power bi logo)
The Power BI data model flips the RDBMS concept by storing data per column rather than per row. This approach is beneficial for
analytical solutions where only a few columns need to be read, but for all available rows. Additionally, many values in a single column are often identical,
such as numerous sales transactions for a limited set of products. Columnar databases can efficiently compress data by storing a value once and tracking which rows it applies to.
Data aggregation is highly efficient in this model. Instead of summing individual values in a column,
the columnar database engine can multiply distinct values by their respective row counts.
LETS TAKE AN EXAMPLE 
FRUIT COLUMN IN A DATABASE 
Fruit
-----
Apple
Banana
Apple
Orange
Banana

Traditional aggregation (summing) would give you:

Apple: 2
Banana: 2
Orange: 1

BUT THE COLUMNAR DATABASE ENGINE WILL DO THE FOLLOWING 

Apple (distinct value) * Number of rows with Apple (2) = Apple: 2
Banana (distinct value) * Number of rows with Banana (2) = Banana: 2
Orange (distinct value) * Number of rows with Orange (1) = Orange: 1

So, in this case, the result is the same as traditional summing, but the method described could be more efficient, especially for very large datasets, 
as it avoids the need to scan the entire column to sum individual values. Instead, it operates on distinct values and their counts directly.

PART 4 
THE MAIN CONCEPTS OF DATA MODELLING
FOR THIS SECTION 
We will be looking at Star Schema & Snowflake schema
The central table in star schema is the Fact Tables.
Fact tables holds all numeric data that are either aggregated or granular.
This is things that have happened. ie sales, financial ledger, student enrollment, sales etc
Through keys, the fact tables are related to tables that hold descriptive information relating to the fact table.
This is called a DIMENSION.
A dimension table keeps the descriptive information that slices and dices the data of the fact table. 
This can also be called Filters.
Dimension tables always relate to fact tables.
There are however some situations where dimension tables are related to each other.
This is called snowflaking. In this situation, relationship exists between dimension tables and you have to pass throuugh
multiple relationships to get from one table to another.
This however brings up some issues as more relationships will slow down the performance of the report.
It will also bring bi directional relationship which we will talk about later in this video.

PART 5 
RELATIONSHIPS
A simple definition of a relationship is the connection between two tables.
Now before we delve into relationships
lets look at keys
An example will shine more light on the importance of keys
Lets say we have a Customer Table and Sales table
A customer can have multiple sales in the sales table.
To create a relationship between these two tables
we must link customerkey from the customer table to the customer key in the sales table
this link enables POWER BI to understand that each row of data in the customer table can be linked to one or more related rows in the sales table.

PART 6 
RELATIONSHIP CARDINALITIES
POWER BI relationships gives abilitey to have fields from multiple tables and filtering ability accross multiple tables in the data model.
There are three cardinalities of relationships in relational data modeling: one to one, one to many and many to many.

PART 7 
One to one relationship
this happens in a scenario when you have unique values in both tables per column.
when we create a relationship between two tables using the primary keys from both tables.
Every row in the first table is related to zero or one from the second table. Therefore, the direction of filtering in a one to one relationship in Power BI is always bidirectional.
When we have a one to one relationship, we can potentially combine the two tables into one table unless the business case we are working on dictates otherwise
We generally recommend avoiding one to one relationships when possible.

PART 8 
One to many or many to one relationship
the most common cardinality, is when each row of the first table is related to many rows of the second table.
This type of cardinality means one of the tables has unique values per each row for the relationship field
and the other table has multiple fields
This is used between fact and dimension tables

Part 9 
Many to many relationship
A many to many relationship is when a row from the first table is related to many rows of data in the second table and a row of data in the second table is related to many rows in the first table.
While in a proper star schema, all relationships between dimensions tables and fact tables are one to many, the many to many relationship is still a legitimate cardinality relationship in Power BI.
With many to many relationships, the necessity of having a primary table in tables participating in the relationship goes away.

PART 10 
FILTER PROPAGATION BEHAVIOR
Filter propagation is one of the most important concepts to understand when building a data model in Power BI Desktop. When we create a relationship between two tables,
we are also filtering the data of one table by the data of another.
Each row of data in the Product table (the 1 side of the relationship) is related to many rows of data in the Sales table (the * side of the relationship)

PART 11 
BIDIRECTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
Now that we understand filter propagation, we can understand what a
bidirectional relationship means and how it affects our data model. A relationship is bidirectional when we set its Cross-filter direction to Both.
The ability to set the direction of filtering to both directions is a nice feature since it can help solve some data visualization challenges. An excellent example is
when we use two slicers on the report page, one showing the ProductCategory column data and the other showing the Full Name data.
As the preceding image illustrates, when the user selects a value from the Customer Name slicer, the filter propagates from the Customer table to the Sales table via the relationship
between them. Therefore, the relevant data is shown in the table visual. So, we can see that Aaron Campbell bought some accessories and bikes here.
Yet, the Product Category slicer still shows all the product categories in the data model.
The end user expects only to see Accessories and Bikes in the Product Category slicer. One way to solve this issue is to set the relationship
between the Sales table and the Product table to bidirectional by setting the relationship’s Cross-filter direction to Both.
Now, if the user selects a value from the Product Category slicer, the filter will propagate via the current relationship from the Product table to the Sales table. However,
it will not propagate from the Sales table to the Customer table via the current relationship since the relationship between the Sales table and the Customer table is not bidirectional.


PART 12 
MEMORY PERFORMANCE AND CONSIDERATIONS

1. Having fewer columns is better. The Power BI model achieves a high compression rate of data due to the columnar database concept. However,
it still needs to keep track of which values belong together in a row. The more columns a table has, the more overhead the model needs to
know what goes where. So, keep the number of columns per table as small as possible. What we see a lot of people do is just load all columns
of a source table into the Power BI model, out of convenience (or laziness, you could say). Take into account that it's easier to add a column
when you need it than to find out which columns aren't being used and remove them later on. A model never shrinks organically!

2. Use the right data types. Internally, the Power BI model optimizes data storage at the level of bits. All optimizations of the columnar database are based on this.
It means that any data type that is not a whole number has to be treated differently using a dictionary of values. This doesn't mean that only the Whole Number data
type is efficient to use; multiple data types are treated as whole numbers internally, like Date, Fixed Decimal Number, and True/False.The data type consideration
also applies to relationships, so use one of the whole number types for relationships when possible.

3. Having many rows is no issue, but watch out for many values. Again, due to the columnar database concept, the Power BI model can store a lot of rows efficiently. #
It will determine the most optimal way to store the values in a column, but more distinct values need more space. The number of unique values in a column is by far the
most important thing to keep an eye on! Often, an obvious way to save memory is to remove unique keys in fact tables. Many transactional systems provide a unique
identifier for each transaction and, when loaded, these are among the most "expensive" columns in a Power BI model. We have had cases where simply removing one unique
column from the largest fact table reduced the size of the model by over 90%!

4. Avoid outliers. In many source systems, developers use special values for denoting the planned absence of real data, or other reasons.
The special values are often outliers to ensure they are not confused with real data; like "December 31, 9999". These outliers can
cause the Power BI model to store a column using a dictionary as with the less efficient data types, even if the values themselves are whole number values.
This is because when storing values as whole numbers, the model has to account for all possible values between the smallest and the largest value in the column,
and it may be more efficient to go for a dictionary instead.To avoid this, leave these values blank or choose a special value that is close to the actual values.

5. Do you really need all that history? An obvious way to have a smaller model is to load less data. We have encountered many cases in which a source system keeps a long history of data.
This is especially true when using a data warehouse as a data source for the Power BI model. You may load sales transactions from the year 2000 onward, but ask yourself:
who is going to analyze the sales data from before 2010 or 2015? It may be better to have a separate model for the few archeologists who want to carve out wisdom from the
past, and have a richer, more elaborate model for daily use containing only a few years of history.

6. In some cases: split columns. In extreme situations, it may be useful to split columns to end up with two columns, each having fewer distinct values.
This could happen with composite keys, for example, a product code consisting of a category code and a sequence number: "A82.019". Separate category code
and sequence number columns would have far fewer distinct values each and may be stored more efficiently. This approach has obvious drawbacks in more complex
handling and, also, the composite column may be needed for a relationship; so only do this when you really, really need it.
